Pain of Pyramid: 

 Hash Values(Trivial):

  The hash value is a numeric value of a fixed length that uniquely identifies data. A hash value is the result of a hashing 
  algorithm. The following are some of the most common hashing algorithms: 

   ->MD5: It is a cryptographic hash function with a 128-bit hash value. MD5 hashes are NOT considered cryptographically secure. 
     In 2011, the IETF published RFC 6151, "Updated Security Considerations for the MD5 Message-Digest and the HMAC-MD5 
     Algorithms," which mentioned a number of attacks against MD5 hashes, including the hash collision.

   ->SHA1: When data is fed to SHA-1 Hashing Algorithm, SHA-1 takes an input and produces a 160-bit hash value string as a 40 
     digit hexadecimal number. NIST deprecated the use of SHA-1 in 2011 and banned its use for digital signatures at the end 
     of 2013 based on it being susceptible to brute-force attacks.

   ->SHA2: SHA-2 Hashing Algorithm was designed by The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the National 
     Security Agency (NSA) in 2001 to replace SHA-1. SHA-2 has many variants, and arguably the most common is SHA-256. The SHA-256 
     algorithm returns a hash value of 256-bits as a 64 digit hexadecimal number.

   A hash is not considered to be cryptographically secure if two files have the same hash value or digest.

  Security professionals usually use the hash values to gain insight into a specific malware sample, a malicious or a suspicious 
  file, and as a way to uniquely identify and reference the malicious artifact.
  Various online tools can be used to do hash lookups like VirusTotal and Metadefender Cloud - OPSWAT.
  It is really easy to spot a malicious file if we have the hash. However, as an attacker, modifying a file by even a single bit is 
  trivial, which would produce a different hash value. With so many variations and instances of known malware or ransomware, threat 
  hunting using file hashes as the IOC (Indicators of Compromise) can become difficult.

 
 IP address(Easy):

  From a defense standpoint, knowledge of the IP addresses an adversary uses can be valuable. A common defense tactic is to 
  block, drop, or deny inbound requests from IP addresses on your parameter or external firewall. This tactic is often not 
  bulletproof as it’s trivial for an experienced adversary to recover simply by using a new public IP address.
  One of the ways an adversary can make it challenging to successfully carry out IP blocking is by using Fast Flux.
  According to Akamai, Fast Flux is a DNS technique used by botnets to hide phishing, web proxying, malware delivery, 
  and malware communication activities behind compromised hosts acting as proxies. The purpose of using the Fast Flux network 
  is to make the communication between malware and its command and control server (C&C) challenging to be discovered by security 
  professionals. So, the primary concept of a Fast Flux network is having multiple IP addresses associated with a domain name, which 
  is constantly changing.

 
 Domain Names(Simple):

  Domain Names can be thought as simply mapping an IP address to a string of text. A domain name can contain a domain and a 
  top-level domain (e.g. evilcorp.com ) or a sub-domain followed by a domain and top-level domain. Domain Names can be a little 
  more of a pain for the attacker to change as they would most likely need to purchase the domain, register it and modify DNS records. 
  Unfortunately for defenders, many DNS providers have loose standards and provide APIs to make it even easier for the attacker to 
  change the domain.
  What is Punycode? As per Jamf, "Punycode is a way of converting words that cannot be written in ASCII, into a Unicode ASCII encoding."
  Attackers usually hide the malicious domains under URL shorteners.   A URL Shortener is a tool that creates a short and unique URL 
  that will redirect to the specific website specified during the initial step of setting up the URL Shortener link.


 Host Artifacts(Annoying):

  On this level, the attacker will feel a little more annoyed and frustrated if you can detect the attack. The attacker would need to 
  circle back at this detection level and change his attack tools and methodologies. This is very time-consuming for the attacker, and 
  probably, he will need to spend more resources on his adversary tools.

  Host artifacts are the traces or observables that attackers leave on the system, such as registry values, suspicious process execution, 
  attack patterns or IOCs (Indicators of Compromise), files dropped by malicious applications, or anything exclusive to the current threat.


 Network Artifacts(Annoying):

  Network Artifacts also belong to the yellow zone in the Pyramid of Pain. This means if you can detect and respond to the threat, the 
  attacker would need more time to go back and change his tactics or modify the tools, which gives you more time to respond and detect 
  the upcoming threats or remediate the existing ones.
  A network artifact can be a user-agent string, C2 information, or URI patterns followed by the HTTP POST requests.An attacker might 
  use a User-Agent string that hasn’t been observed in your environment before or seems out of the ordinary. The User-Agent is defined 
  by RFC2616 as the request-header field that contains the information about the user agent originating the request.
  Network artifacts can be detected in Wireshark PCAPs (file that contains the packet data of a network) by using a network protocol 
  analyzer such as TShark or exploring IDS (Intrusion Detection System) logging from a source such as Snort.


 Tools(Challenging):

  The attacker would most likely give up trying to break into your network or go back and try to create a new tool that serves the same 
  purpose. It will be a game over for the attackers as they would need to invest some money into building a new tool (if they are capable 
  of doing so), find the tool that has the same potential, or even gets some training to learn how to be proficient in a certain tool. 
  Attackers would use the utilities to create malicious macro documents (maldocs) for spearphishing attempts, a backdoor that can be used 
  to establish C2 (Command and Control Infrastructure), any custom .EXE, and .DLL files, payloads, or password crackers.
  Antivirus signatures, detection rules, and YARA rules can be great weapons for you to use against attackers at this stage.
  MalwareBazaar and Malshare are good resources to provide you with access to the samples, malicious feeds, and YARA results - these 
  all can be very helpful when it comes to threat hunting and incident response. 
  Fuzzy hashing is also a strong weapon against the attacker's tools. Fuzzy hashing helps you to perform similarity analysis - match two 
  files with minor differences based on the fuzzy hash values. One of the examples of fuzzy hashing is the usage of SSDeep; on the SSDeep 
  official website, you can also find the complete explanation for fuzzy hashing. 


 TTPs(Tough):

  TTPs stands for Tactics, Techniques & Procedures. This includes the whole MITRE ATT&CK Matrix, which means all the steps taken by an 
  adversary to achieve his goal, starting from phishing attempts to persistence and data exfiltration. 
  If you can detect and respond to the TTPs quickly, you leave the adversaries almost no chance to fight back. For, example if you could 
  detect a Pass-the-Hash attack using Windows Event Log Monitoring and remediate it, you would be able to find the compromised host very 
  quickly and stop the lateral movement inside your network. At this point, the attacker would have two options:

  1.Go back, do more research and training, reconfigure their custom tools
  2.Give up and find another target

  Option 2 definitely sounds less time and resource-consuming.



Cyber Kill Chain:

 The term kill chain is a military concept related to the structure of an attack. It consists of target identification, decision and order 
 to attack the target, and finally the target destruction. Lockheed Martin, a global security and aerospace company, that established the 
 Cyber Kill Chain® framework for the cybersecurity industry in 2011 based on the military concept. The framework defines the steps used by 
 adversaries or malicious actors in cyberspace. To succeed, an adversary needs to go through all phases of the Kill Chain. We will go through 
 the attack phases and help you better understand adversaries and their techniques used in the attack to defend yourself.

 1.Reconnaissance:

  Reconnaissance is the research and planning phase of an attack against a system or victim. Adversaries use this phase to gather information 
  about their target to inform their next steps. This information can include infrastructure details, employee data, business processes, and 
  exposed technologies. Reconnaissance is often passive and undetected. 
  Poor recon typically leads to sloppy attacks, while well informed adversaries can create highly targeted, believable payloads that increase 
  their chances of success.
  A valuable piece of recon is OSINT (Open-Source Intelligence). With OSINT, adversaries gather insights about their target through publicly 
  available information. Some public sources where OSINT data can be collected from include:

   ->Search engines
   ->Print and online media
   ->Social media accounts
   ->Online forums and blogs
   ->Online public record databases
   ->WHOIS and technical data
 
   Types:

   ->Passive Recon: This involves having no direct interaction with the target. This may include WHOIS lookups, social media scraping, or 
     reviewing breach data.
 
   ->Active Recon: This involves direct contact with the target with activities such as social engineering, port scanning, banner grabbing, 
     or probing for open services.

  Email harvesting is the process of obtaining email addresses from public, paid, or free services. An attacker can use email-address harvesting 
  for a phishing attack (a type of social-engineering attack used to steal sensitive data, including login credentials and credit card numbers). 
  The attacker will have a big arsenal of tools available for reconnaissance purposes. Here are some of them:

   ->theHarvester(opens in new tab): other than gathering emails, this tool is also capable of gathering names, subdomains, IPs, and URLs using 
     multiple public data sources.

   ->Hunter.io(opens in new tab): this is an email hunting tool that will let you obtain contact information associated with the domain.

   ->OSINT Framework(opens in new tab): OSINT Framework provides the collection of OSINT tools based on various categories.


 2.Weaponization:

  After a successful reconnaissance stage, attacker would work on turning the raw information into actionable attack tools through crafting malware 
  and exploits into a payload. Most attackers usually use automated tools to generate the malware or refer to the DarkWeb(opens in new tab) to 
  purchase the malware. More sophisticated actors or nation-sponsored APT (Advanced Persistent Threat Groups) would write their custom malware to 
  make the malware sample unique and evade detection on the target.


 3.Delivery:

  Delivery is when attacker decides to choose the method for transmitting the payload or the malware onto the target environment. There are plenty 
  of options to choose from: 

   ->Phishing email: after conducting the reconnaissance and determining the targets for the attack, the malicious actor could craft a malicious 
     email that would target either a specific person (spear phishing attack) or multiple people in the company. The email would contain a malicious 
     link or email attachment that would result into a compromise.

   ->USB drops offer the attacker a physical delivery medium into public places like coffee shops, car parks, or on the street. An attacker might 
     decide to conduct a sophisticated USB Drop Attack by printing the company's logo on the USB drives and mailing them to the company while 
     pretending to be a customer sending the USB devices as a gift.

   ->Watering hole attacks are targeted and designed to aim at a specific group of people by compromising the website they are usually visiting, 
     redirecting them to a malicious website of the attacker's choice or creation. Victims would unintentionally download malware or a malicious 
     application to their computer, resulting in a drive-by download. An example can be a malicious pop-up asking to download a fake Browser extension.

 4.Exploitation:

  Exploitation is the moment the attacker's code executes on the target, taking advantage of a known vulnerability. In this phase, Megatron can 
  opt to utilise a number of key techniques to gain access:
 
   ->Malicious macro execution: This may have been delivered through a phishing email, that would execute ransomware when the victim opens it.

   ->Zero-day exploits: These leverages on unknown and unpatched flaws in a system. These exploits leave no opportunity for detection at the 
     beginning.
  
   ->Known CVEs: The attacker can choose to exploit unpatched public vulnerabilities found on the target environment.

  After gaining access to the system, the malicious actor could exploit software, system, or server-based vulnerabilities to escalate the 
  privileges or move laterally through the network. 

  Signs of exploitation to look out for include:

   ->Unexpected process spawns.
   
   ->Registry changes or new services created.
   
   ->Suspicious command-line arguments found in system logs.

 5.Installation:

  As you have learned from the Weaponization phase, the backdoor lets an attacker bypass security measures and hide the access. A backdoor is 
  also known as an access point. Once the attacker gets access to the system, he would want to reconnect back to the system if he loses the 
  connection to it or if he got detected and got the initial access removed. Or if the system is later patched, they will no longer have access 
  to it. That is when the attacker needs to install a persistent backdoor. A persistent backdoor will let the attacker access the system he 
  compromised in the past.
  
  The persistence can be achieved through:

   ->Installing a web shell on the webserver. A web shell is a malicious script written in web development programming languages such as 
     ASP, PHP, or JSP used by an attacker to maintain access to the compromised system. Because of the web shell simplicity and file 
     formatting (.php, .asp, .aspx, .jsp, etc.) can be difficult to detect and might be classified as benign.

   ->Installing a backdoor on the victim's machine. For example, the attacker can use Meterpreter to install a backdoor 
     on the victim's machine. Meterpreter is a Metasploit Framework payload that gives an interactive shell from which an attacker can 
     interact with the victim's machine remotely and execute the malicious code.

   ->Creating or modifying Windows services. This technique is known as T1543.003 on MITRE ATT&CK (MITRE ATT&CK® is a knowledge base 
     of adversary tactics and techniques based on real-world scenarios). An attacker can create or modify the Windows services to execute 
     the malicious scripts or payloads regularly as a part of the persistence. An attacker can use the tools like ssc.exe (sc.exe lets
     you Create, Start, Stop, Query, or Delete any Windows Service) and Reg to modify service configurations. The attacker can also 
     masquerade the malicious payload by using a service name that is known to be related to the Operating System or legitimate software.

   ->Adding the entry to the "run keys" for the malicious payload in the Registry or the Startup Folder. By doing that, the payload will 
     execute each time the user logs in to the computer. According to MITRE ATT&CK, there is a startup folder location for individual 
     user accounts and a system-wide startup folder that will be checked no matter what user account logs in.

  In this phase, the attacker can also use the Timestomping technique to avoid detection by the forensic investigator and also to make 
  the malware appear as a part of a legitimate program. The timestomping technique lets an attacker modify the file's timestamps, 
  including to modify, access, create and change times.     


 6.Command & Control:

  After getting persistence and executing the malware on the victim's machine, attacker opens up the C2 (Command and Control) channel 
  through the malware to remotely control and manipulate the victim. This term is also known as C&C or C2 Beaconing as a type of 
  malicious communication between a C&C server and malware on the infected host. The infected host will consistently communicate 
  with the C2 server; that is also where the beaconing term came from. The compromised endpoint would communicate with an external 
  server set up by an attacker to establish a command & control channel. After establishing the connection, the attacker has full 
  control of the victim's machine. Until recently, IRC (Internet Relay Chat) was the traditional C2 channel used by attackers. 
  This is no longer the case, as modern security solutions can easily detect malicious IRC traffic. The most common C2 channels 
  used by adversaries include:

   ->HTTP on port 80 and HTTPS on port 443, where this type of beaconing blends the malicious traffic with the legitimate traffic 
     and can help the attacker evade firewalls.

   ->DNS (Domain Name Server), where the infected machine makes constant DNS requests to the DNS server that belongs to an attacker, 
     this type of C2 communication is also known as DNS Tunneling.


 7.Exfiltration:

  After going through six phases of the attack, Megatron can finally achieve his goals, which means taking action on the original 
  objectives. With hands-on keyboard access, the attacker can achieve the following: 

   ->Collect the credentials from users.

   ->Perform privilege escalation (gaining elevated access like domain administrator access from a workstation by exploiting the 
     misconfiguration).

   ->Internal reconnaissance (for example, an attacker gets to interact with internal software to find its vulnerabilities).

   ->Lateral movement through the company's environment.

   ->Collect and exfiltrate sensitive data.

   ->Deleting the backups and shadow copies. Shadow Copy is a Microsoft technology that can create backup copies, snapshots of 
     computer files, or volumes. 

   ->Overwrite or corrupt data.



Unified Kill Chain:

 Paul Pols' Unified Kill Chain,(opens in new tab) published in 2017, aims to complement (not compete with) other cybersecurity 
 kill chain frameworks, such as Lockheed Martin’s and MITRE’s ATT&CK. The UKC states that there are 18 phases to an attack: 
 Everything from reconnaissance to data exfiltration and understanding an attacker's motive.


 Goal: In(Initial Foothold)

  1.Reconnaissance:

   This phase of the UKC describes techniques that an adversary employs to gather information relating to their target. This 
   can be achieved through means of passive and active reconnaissance. The information gathered during this phase is used all 
   throughout the later stages of the UKC (such as the initial foothold).

   Information gathered from this phase can include:

    ->Discovering what systems and services are running on the target, this is beneficial information in the weaponisation 
      and exploitation phases of this section.

    ->Finding contact lists or lists of employees that can be impersonated or used in either a social engineering or 
      phishing attack.

    ->Looking for potential credentials that may be of use in later stages,  such as pivoting or initial access.

    ->Understanding the network topology and other networked systems can be used to pivot too. 

  2.Weaponization:

   This phase of the UKC describes the adversary setting up the necessary infrastructure to perform the attack. For example, 
   this could be setting up a command and control server, or a system capable of catching reverse shells and delivering 
   payloads to the system.

  3.Delivery:

   Techniques resulting in the transmission of a weaponized object to the targeted environment.

  4.Social Engineering:

   This phase of the UKC describes techniques that an adversary can employ to manipulate employees to perform actions that 
   will aid in the adversaries attack. For example, a social engineering attack could include:

    ->Getting a user to open a malicious attachment in a phishing email.

    ->Impersonating a web page and having the user enter their credentials.

    ->Calling or visiting the target and impersonating a user (for example, requesting a password reset) or being able to 
      gain access to areas of a site that the attacker would not previously be capable of (for example, impersonating a 
      utility engineer).

  5.Exploitation:

   This phase of the UKC describes how an attacker takes advantage of weaknesses or vulnerabilities present in a system. 
   The UKC defines "Exploitation" as abuse of vulnerabilities to perform code execution. For example:

    ->Uploading and executing a reverse shell to a web application.

    ->Interfering with an automated script on the system to execute code.

    ->Abusing a web application vulnerability to execute code on the system it is running on.

  6.Persistence:

   This phase of the UKC describes the techniques an adversary uses to maintain access to a system they have gained an 
   initial foothold on. For example:

    ->Creating a service on the target system that will allow the attacker to regain access.
 
    ->Adding the target system to a Command & Control server where commands can be executed remotely at any time.

    ->Leaving other forms of backdoors that execute when a certain action occurs on the system (i.e. a reverse shell 
      will execute when a system administrator logs in).

  7.Defence Evasion:

   This phase specifically is used to understand the techniques an adversary uses to evade defensive measures put in 
   place in the system or network. For example, this could be:

    ->Web application firewalls.

    ->Network firewalls.

    ->Anti-virus systems on the target machine.

    ->Intrusion detection systems.

  8.Command & Control:

   The "Command & Control" phase of the UKC combines the efforts an adversary made during the "Weaponization" stage 
   of the UKC to establish communications between the adversary and target system. An adversary can establish command 
   and control of a target system to achieve its action on objectives. For example, the adversary can:

    ->Execute commands.
    
    ->Steal data, credentials and other information.

    ->Use the controlled server to pivot to other systems on the network.

  9.Pivoting:

   "Pivoting" is the technique an adversary uses to reach other systems within a network that are not otherwise accessible 
   (for example, they are not exposed to the internet). There are often many systems in a network that are not directly 
   reachable and often contain valuable data or have weaker security. For example, an adversary can gain access to a 
   web server that is publically accessible to attack other systems that are within the same network (but are not accessible 
   via the internet).


 Goal: Through(Network Propagation)

  9.Pivoting:

   Once the attacker has access to the system, they would use it as their staging site and a tunnel between their command 
   operations and the victim’s network. The system would also be used as the distribution point for all malware and backdoors 
   at later stages.

  10.Discovery:

   The adversary would uncover information about the system and the network it is connected to. Within this stage, the 
   knowledge base would be built from the active user accounts, the permissions granted, applications and software in use, 
   web browser activity, files, directories and network shares, and system configurations.

  11.Privilege Escalation:

   Following their knowledge-gathering, the adversary would try to gain more prominent permissions within the pivot system. 
   They would leverage the information on the accounts present with vulnerabilities and misconfigurations found to elevate 
   their access.

  12.Execution:

   This is where they deploy their malicious code using the pivot system as their host. Remote trojans, C2 scripts, 
   malicious links and scheduled tasks are deployed and created to facilitate a recurring presence on the system and 
   uphold their persistence.

  13.Credential Access:

   Working hand in hand with the Privilege Escalation stage, the adversary would attempt to steal account names and 
   passwords through various methods, including keylogging and credential dumping. This makes them harder to detect 
   during their attack as they would be using legitimate credentials.

  14.Lateral Movement:

   With the credentials and elevated privileges, the adversary would seek to move through the network and jump onto 
   other targeted systems to achieve their primary objective. The stealthier the technique used, the better.


 Goal: Out(Action on Objectives):

  15: Collection:

   After all the hunting for access and assets, the adversary will be seeking to gather all the valuable data of interest. 
   This, in turn, compromises the confidentiality of the data and would lead to the next attack stage – Exfiltration. 
   The main target sources include drives, browsers, audio, video and email.

  16.Exfiltration:

   To elevate their compromise, the adversary would seek to steal data, which would be packaged using encryption measures 
   and compression to avoid any detection. The C2 channel and tunnel deployed in the earlier phases will come in handy 
   during this process.

  17.Impact:

   If the adversary seeks to compromise the integrity and availability of the data assets, they would manipulate, 
   interrupt or destroy these assets. The goal would be to disrupt business and operational processes and may involve 
   removing account access, disk wipes, and data encryption such as ransomware, defacement and denial of service (DoS) 
   attacks.

  18.Objectives:

   With all the power and access to the systems and network, the adversary would seek to achieve their strategic goal 
   for the attack. For example, if the attack was financially motivated, they may seek to encrypt files and systems 
   with ransomware and ask for payment to release the data. In other instances, the attacker may seek to damage the 
   reputation of the business, and they would release private and confidential information to the public.