Purpose of Network Traffic Analysis:
 
 Generally, we will use network traffic analysis to:
 
  ->Monitor network performance
  ->Check for abnormalities in the network. E.g., sudden performance peaks, slow network, etc
  ->Inspect the content of suspicious communication internally and externally. E.g., exfiltration 
    via DNS, download of a malicious ZIP file over HTTP, lateral movement, etc
 
 From a SOC perspective, network traffic analysis helps:
 
  ->Detecting suspicious or malicious activity
  ->Reconstructing attacks during incident response
  ->Verifying and validating alerts



 TCP/IP Model:

  The best way to showcase the traffic we can observe in the network is by using the architecture 
  implemented in nearly every device with a network interface: the TCP/IP stack.

  ->Application: 
    On the application layer, we can find two important information structures: the application header 
    information and the application data itself (payload). This information will change depending on which 
    application layer protocol is used. Let's look at an example of HTTP.
    Most web proxies and firewalls log the application headers of a client sending a GET request and the 
    server's response. What they don't log is the application data or payload.

  ->Transport:
    The application data and header are segmented and encapsulated at the transport layer into smaller pieces. 
    Each piece includes a transport header, in most cases TCP or UDP.
    Firewall logs often include the source and destination ports and the flags, but all the other fields are 
    often not included. However, they are valuable for detecting certain types of attacks, such as session 
    hijacking. Session hijacking can be detected by analyzing the sequence numbers included in the header. 
    If the sequence numbers are suddenly far apart, further investigation is warranted. The output below shows 
    a series of packets captured with Wireshark.

  ->Internet:
    When the transport layer sends down a segment, the internet layer also adds its header. If the segment is 
    larger than the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU), it will be divided into fragments, and a header will be added 
    to each of them. The fields that are most often logged are the source and destination IP and TTL. This is 
    sufficient for most use cases. But, if we want to, for example, detect fragmentation attacks, we will need to 
    inspect the fragment offset and total length fields as well. There are different variations of a fragmentation 
    attack. For example, an attacker can create tiny fragments to evade the IDS or mess up the reassembly of 
    fragments by using overlapping byte ranges. 

  ->Link:
    Once the internet layer finishes encapsulation, the IP packet is sent to the link layer. The link layer adds 
    its header as well, containing more addressing information. Most logs will display the source and destination 
    MAC addresses. For certain types of attacks, for example, ARP poisoning or spoofing, the information in the 
    logs won't be sufficient. For these types of attacks, we need the full packet and context. What you, for 
    example, can't see in a log is when the MAC address appears from multiple interfaces or when many gratuitous 
    ARP packets are sent out with conflicting MAC addresses.



 Sources and Flows:

  Sources:
   
   There is two network traffic sources exist: endpoint and intermediary devices. These devices can be found within 
   the LAN and WAN.

   Intermediary Sources:
    
    These are devices through which traffic mostly passes. While they generate some traffic, it is significantly 
    lower than what endpoint devices generate. Under this category, we can find firewalls, switches, web proxies, 
    IDS, IPS, routers, access points, wireless LAN controllers, and many more. Maybe less relevant for us, but all 
    the infrastructure of Internet Service Providers is also considered part of this category.
    The traffic that originates from these devices comes from services like routing protocols (EIGRP, OSPF, BGP), 
    management protocols (SNMP, PING), logging protocols (SYSLOG), and other supporting protocols (ARP, STP, DHCP).

   Endpoint Sources:
    
    These are devices where traffic originates and ends. Endpoint devices take the bulk of the network bandwidth. 
    Devices that fall under this category are servers, hosts, IoT devices, printers, virtual machines, cloud resources, 
    mobile phones, tablets, and many more.

 
  Flows:
  
   A network traffic flow is typically determined by the services available in the network, such as Active Directory, 
   SMB, HTTPS, and so on. In a typical corporate network, we can group these flows into North-South and East-West traffic.

   North-South Traffic:
    
    NS traffic is often monitored closely as it flows from the LAN to the WAN and vice versa. The most well-known 
    services in this category are client-server protocols like HTTPS, DNS, SSH, VPN, SMTP, RDP, and many more. Each 
    of these protocols has two streams: ingress (inbound) and egress (outbound). All of this traffic passes the firewall 
    in one way or another. Configuring firewall rules and logging properly are key to visibility.

   East-West Traffic:
    
    EW traffic stays within the corporate LAN, so it is often monitored less. However, it is important to keep track of 
    these flows. When the network is compromised, an attacker will often exploit different services internally to move 
    laterally within the network. As we see below, there are many services within this category. 



Wireshark:

 Tool Overview:

  Colouring Packets:
   
   Along with quick packet information, Wireshark also colour packets in order of different conditions and the protocol to 
   spot anomalies and protocols in captures quickly. This glance at packet information can help track down exactly what 
   you're looking for during analysis. You can create custom colour rules to spot events of interest by using display 
   filters. 
   Wireshark has two types of packet colouring methods: temporary rules that are only available during a program session and 
   permanent rules that are saved under the preference file (profile) and available for the next program session. You can 
   use the "right-click menu" or "View --> Coloring Rules" menu to create permanent colouring rules. The "Colourise Packet 
   List" menu activates/deactivates the colouring rules. Temporary packet colouring is done with the "right-click menu" or 
   "View --> Conversation Filter" menu.

 
  Traffic Sniffing:
   
   You can use the blue "shark button" to start network sniffing (capturing traffic), the red button will stop the sniffing, 
   and the green button will restart the sniffing process. The status bar will also provide the used sniffing interface and 
   the number of collected packets.


  Merge PCAP Files:
   
   Wireshark can combine two pcap files into one single file. You can use the "File --> Merge" menu path to merge a pcap with 
   the processed one. When you choose the second file, Wireshark will show the total number of packets in the selected file. 
   Once you click "open", it will merge the existing pcap file with the chosen one and create a new pcap file. Note that you 
   need to save the "merged" pcap file before working on it.


  View File Details:
  
   recall the file details (File hash, capture time, capture file comments, interface and statistics) to identify the file, 
   classify and prioritise it. You can view the details by following "Statistics --> Capture File Properties" or by clicking 
   the "pcap icon located on the left bottom".


 
 Packet Dissection:
 
  Packet dissection is also known as protocol dissection, which investigates packet details by decoding available protocols and 
  fields. Wireshark supports a long list of protocols for dissection, and you can also write your dissection scripts.

  Packet Details:
   
   You can click on a packet in the packet list pane to open its details (double-click will open details in a new window). Packets 
   consist of 5 to 7 layers based on the OSI model.

   The Frame (Layer 1):
   This will show you what frame/packet you are looking at and details specific to the Physical layer of the OSI model.

   Source [MAC] (Layer 2):
   This will show you the source and destination MAC Addresses; from the Data Link layer of the OSI model.

   Source [IP] (Layer 3):
   This will show you the source and destination IPv4 Addresses; from the Network layer of the OSI model.

   Protocol (Layer 4):
   This will show you details of the protocol used (UDP/TCP) and source and destination ports; from the Transport layer of 
   the OSI model.

   Protocol Errors:
   This continuation of the 4th layer shows specific segments from TCP that needed to be reassembled.

   Application Protocol (Layer 5):
   This will show details specific to the protocol used, such as HTTP, FTP,  and SMB. From the Application layer of the OSI 
   model.

   Application Data: 
   This extension of the 5th layer can show the application-specific data.



 Packet Navigation:

  Packet Numbers:
   
   Wireshark calculates the number of investigated packets and assigns a unique number for each packet. This helps the 
   analysis process for big captures and makes it easy to go back to a specific point of an event.


  Go to Packet:
  
   Packet numbers do not only help to count the total number of packets or make it easier to find/investigate specific 
   packets. This feature not only navigates between packets up and down; it also provides in-frame packet tracking and 
   finds the next packet in the particular part of the conversation. You can use the "Go" menu and toolbar to view 
   specific packets.


  Find Packets:
  
   Apart from packet number, Wireshark can find packets by packet content. You can use the "Edit --> Find Packet" menu 
   to make a search inside the packets for a particular event of interest. This helps analysts and administrators to 
   find specific intrusion patterns or failure traces.

   There are two crucial points in finding packets. The first is knowing the input type. This functionality accepts 
   four types of inputs (Display filter, Hex, String and Regex). String and regex searches are the most commonly used 
   earch types. Searches are case insensitive, but you can set the case sensitivity in your search by clicking the 
   radio button.

   The second point is choosing the search field. You can conduct searches in the three panes (packet list, packet 
   details, and packet bytes), and it is important to know the available information in each pane to find the event 
   of interest. For example, if you try to find the information available in the packet details pane and conduct the 
   search in the packet list pane, Wireshark won't find it even if it exists.


  Mark Packets:
  
   Marking packets is another helpful functionality for analysts. You can find/point to a specific packet for further 
   investigation by marking it. It helps analysts point to an event of interest or export particular packets from the 
   capture. You can use the "Edit" or the "right-click" menu to mark/unmark packets.

   Marked packets will be shown in black regardless of the original colour representing the connection type. Note that 
   marked packet information is renewed every file session, so marked packets will be lost after closing the capture file.


  Packet Comments:
  
   You can add comments for particular packets that will help the further investigation or remind and point out 
   important/suspicious points for other layer analysts. Unlike packet marking, the comments can stay within the capture 
   file until the operator removes them. You can use the "Edit" or the "right-click" menu to write packet comments.


  Export Packets:
  
  This functionality helps analysts share the only suspicious packages (decided scope). Thus redundant information is 
   not included in the analysis process. You can use the "File" menu to export packets.


  Export Objects (Files):
  
   Wireshark can extract files transferred through the wire. For a security analyst, it is vital to discover shared 
   files and save them for further investigation. Exporting objects are available only for selected protocol's streams 
   (DICOM, HTTP, IMF, SMB and TFTP).

  Time Display Format:
  
   Wireshark lists the packets as they are captured, so investigating the default flow is not always the best option. 
   By default, Wireshark shows the time in "Seconds Since Beginning of Capture", the common usage is using the UTC 
   Time Display Format for a better view. You can use the "View --> Time Display Format" menu to change the time display 
   format.



 Packet Filtering:
  
  Wireshark has a powerful filter engine that helps analysts to narrow down the traffic and focus on the event of 
  interest. Wireshark has two types of filtering approaches: capture and display filters. Capture filters are used 
  for "capturing" only the packets valid for the used filter. Display filters are used for "viewing" the packets valid 
  for the used filter.
 
  Filters are specific queries designed for protocols available in Wireshark's official protocol reference. While the 
  filters are only the option to investigate the event of interest, there are two different ways to filter traffic and 
  remove the noise from the capture file.


  Apply as Filter:
   
   This is the most basic way of filtering traffic. While investigating a capture file, you can click on the field you 
   want to filter and use the "right-click menu" or "Analyse --> Apply as Filter" menu to filter the specific value.


  Conversation Filter:
  
   When you use the "Apply as a Filter" option, you will filter only a single entity of the packet. This option is a 
   good way of investigating a particular value in packets. However, suppose you want to investigate a specific packet 
   number and all linked packets by focusing on IP addresses and port numbers. In that case, the "Conversation Filter" 
   option helps you view only the related packets and hide the rest of the packets easily. You can use the"right-click 
   menu" or "Analyse --> Conversation Filter" menu to filter conversations.


  Colourise Conversation:
   
   This option is similar to the "Conversation Filter" with one difference. It highlights the linked packets without 
   applying a display filter and decreasing the number of viewed packets. This option works with the "Colouring Rules" 
   option to apply changes to the colored packets without taking the previously applied colour rules into account. 
   You can use the "right-click menu" or "View --> Colourise Conversation" menu to colourise a linked packet in a 
   single click. Note that you can use the "View --> Colourise Conversation --> Reset Colourisation" menu to undo 
   this operation.


  Prepare as Filter:
  
   Similar to "Apply as Filter", this option helps analysts create display filters using the "right-click" menu. 
   However, unlike the previous one, this model doesn't apply the filters after the choice. It adds the required 
   query to the pane and waits for the execution command (enter) or another chosen filtering option by using the 
   ".. and/or.." from the "right-click menu".


  Apply as Column:
  
   By default, the packet list pane provides basic information about each packet. You can use the "right-click menu" 
   or "Analyse --> Apply as Column" menu to add columns to the packet list pane. Once you click on a value and apply 
   it as a column, it will be visible on the packet list pane. This function helps analysts examine the appearance of 
   a specific value/field across the available packets in the capture file. You can enable/disable the columns shown 
   in the packet list pane by clicking on the top of the packet list pane.


  Follow Stream:
   
   Wireshark displays everything in packet portion size. However, it is possible to reconstruct the streams and view 
   the raw traffic as it is presented at the application level. Following the protocol, streams help analysts recreate 
   the application-level data and understand the event of interest. It is also possible to view the unencrypted protocol 
   data like usernames, passwords and other transferred data.

   You can use the"right-click menu" or "Analyse --> Follow TCP/UDP/HTTP Stream" menu to follow traffic streams. 
   Streams are shown in a separate dialogue box; packets originating from the server are highlighted with blue, and 
   those originating from the client are highlighted with red.


  Simple Display Filter Queries:
   
   The easiest way to filter quickly the huge amount of packets, is by applying a display filter using the 
   "Apply a display filter" bar.

   Filter By Protocol Name or Port:
   
    To filter by protocol name, simply type in the protocol name and hit enter or click on the arrow button at the right 
    hand side of the display filter bar. You can similarly filter for other protocols using keywords like arp, dhcp, ftp, 
    smtp, pop, imap, and more.
    To filter by protocol port number, you can use the structure "tcp.port == <port number>" or "udp.port == <port number>". 
    For example, if you want to see only http packets, you would use the filter "tcp.port == 80" and then hit enter.


   Filter By IP:
   
    When analyzing a packet capture, there is often a need to filter for a specific IP.

    ->IP: Show all IP packets.

    ->ip.addr == 10.10.10.111: Show all packets containing IP address 10.10.10.111.

    ->ip.addr == 10.10.10.0/24: Show all packets containing IP addresses from 10.10.10.0/24 subnet.

    ->ip.src == 10.10.10.111: Show all packets originated from 10.10.10.111.

    ->ip.dst == 10.10.10.111: Show all packets sent to 10.10.10.111.


  TCP and UDP Filters:

   TCP filters help analysts filter the traffic according to protocol-level information from the packets (Transport layer of 
   the OSI model). These filters filter transport protocol level information like source and destination ports, sequence number, 
   acknowledgement number, windows size, timestamps, flags, length and protocol errors.

   ->tcp.port == 80: Show all TCP packets with port 80 

   ->tcp.srcport == 1234: Show all TCP packets originating from port 1234

   ->tcp.dstport == 80: Show all TCP packets sent to port 80

   ->udp.port == 53: Show all UDP packets with port 53

   ->udp.srcport == 1234: Show all UDP packets originating from port 1234

   ->udp.dstport == 5353: Show all UDP packets sent to port 5353


  Application Level Protocol Filters | HTTP and DNS:

   Application-level protocol filters help analysts filter the traffic according to application protocol level information from 
   the packets (Application layer of the OSI model ). These filters filter application-specific information, like payload and 
   linked data, depending on the protocol type.

   ->http: Show all HTTP packets

   ->http.response.code == 200: Show all packets with HTTP response code "200"

   ->http.request.method == "GET": Show all HTTP GET requests

   ->http.request.method == "POST": Show all HTTP POST requests

   ->dns: Show all DNS packets

   ->dns.flags.response == 0: Show all DNS requests

   ->dns.flags.response == 1: Show all DNS responses

   ->dns.qry.type == 1: Show all DNS "A" records


  Display Filter Expressions:

   Wireshark has a built-in option (Display Filter Expression) that stores all supported protocol structures to help analysts 
   create display filters. When an analyst can't recall the required filter for a specific protocol or is unsure about the 
   assignable values for a filter, the Display Filter Expressions menu provides an easy-to-use display filter builder guide. 
   It is available under the "Analyse --> Display Filter Expression" menu.



 Statistics:
  
  This menu provides multiple statistics options ready to investigate to help users see the big picture in terms of the 
  scope of the traffic, available protocols, endpoints and conversations, and some protocol-specific details like DHCP, 
  DNS and HTTP/2.


  Resolved Addresses:
   
   This option helps analysts identify IP addresses and DNS names available in the capture file by providing the list of 
   the resolved addresses and their hostnames. Note that the hostname information is taken from DNS answers in the capture 
   file. Analysts can quickly identify the accessed resources by using this menu. Thus they can spot accessed resources 
   and evaluate them according to the event of interest. You can use the  "Statistics --> Resolved Addresses" menu to view 
   all resolved addresses by Wireshark.


  Protocol Hierarchy:
   
   This option breaks down all available protocols from the capture file and helps analysts view the protocols in a tree 
   view based on packet counters and percentages. Thus analysts can view the overall usage of the ports and services and 
   focus on the event of interest. You can right-click and filter the event of interest.You can use the 
   "Statistics --> Protocol Hierarchy"


  Conversations:
   
   Conversation represents traffic between two specific endpoints. This option provides the list of the conversations in 
   five base formats; ethernet, IPv4, IPv6, TCP and UDP. Thus analysts can identify all conversations and contact 
   endpoints for the event of interest.  You can use the "Statistic --> Conversations" menu to view this info.


  Endpoints:
   
   The endpoints option is similar to the conversations option. The only difference is that this option provides unique 
   information for a single information field (Ethernet, IPv4, IPv6, TCP and UDP ). Thus analysts can identify the unique 
   endpoints in the capture file and use it for the event of interest. You can use the "Statistics --> Endpoints" menu 
   to view this info.

   Wireshark also supports resolving MAC addresses to human-readable format using the manufacturer name assigned by IEEE. 
   Note that this conversion is done through the first three bytes of the MAC address and only works for the known 
   manufacturers. When you review the ethernet endpoints, you can activate this option with the"Name resolution"button in 
   the lower-left corner of the endpoints window.

   Name resolution is not limited only to MAC addresses. Wireshark provides IP and port name resolution options as well. 
   However, these options are not enabled by default. If you want to use these functionalities, you need to activate them 
   through the "Edit --> Preferences --> Name Resolution"menu. Once you enable IP and port name resolution, you will see 
   the resolved IP address and port names in the packet list pane and also will be able to view resolved names in the 
   "Conversations" and "Endpoints" menus as well.

   Besides name resolution, Wireshark also provides an IP geolocation mapping that helps analysts identify the map's source 
   and destination addresses. But this feature is not activated by default and needs supplementary data like the GeoIP 
   database. Currently, Wireshark supports MaxMind databases, and the latest versions of the Wireshark come configured 
   MaxMind DB resolver. However, you still need MaxMind DB files and provide the database path to Wireshark by using the  
   "Edit --> Preferences --> Name Resolution --> MaxMind database directories" menu. Once you download and indicate the 
   path, Wireshark will automatically provide GeoIP information under the IP protocol details for the matched IP addresses.


   IPv4 and IPv6:

    The statistics menu has two options for narrowing the statistics on packets containing a specific IP version. Thus, 
    analysts can identify and list all events linked to specific IP versions in a single window and use it for the event 
    of interest. You can use the "Statistics --> IPvX Statistics" menu to view this info.


   DNS:

    This option breaks down all DNS packets from the capture file and helps analysts view the findings in a tree view based 
    on packet counters and percentages of the DNS protocol. Thus analysts can view the DNS service's overall usage, including 
    rcode, opcode, class, query type, service and query stats and use it for the event of interest. You can use the  
    "Statistics --> DNS" menu to view this info.


   HTTP:

    This option breaks down all HTTP packets from the capture file and helps analysts view the findings in a tree view based 
    on packet counters and percentages of the HTTP protocol. Thus analysts can view the HTTP service's overall usage, including 
    request and response codes and the original requests.  You can use the "Statistics --> HTTP"menu to view this info.

